docs: add logout guide (#4889)
zitadel/zitadel: docs/docs/guides/integrate/logout.md

---
title: Logout
---

This guide shows you different concepts and use cases for logout and how to use it in ZITADEL.

## OpenID Connect Single Logout 

### Single Sign On (SSO) vs Single Logout (SLO)

Single Sing On (SSO) allows a user to login once and be authenticated to several related applications.

> Single Logout (SLO) is the counterpart to this. With SLO a user can logout and terminate all related sessions, without actively logout from all systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single Logout (SLO) is the counterpart to SSO. With SLO a user can logout and terminate sessions across many applications, without actively logging out from them.
```

### OpenID Connect Logout

The purpose of a logout is to terminate a user session. 
Depending on how the session handling is implemented, there are different mechanisms that can be used.

> There are two different possibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two possibilities where sessions are stored:
```

> There are two different possibilities:

Reviewer: @hifabienne would this not be better located in the section above instead of the OIDC Logout?

> - User Agent stores session information (e.g. in a cookie)
> - Server Side stores session information (e.g. in a database)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The User Agent (e.g the Browser or Mobile App) stores the session information (e.g. in a cookie)
- A Server stores the session information (e.g. in a database or api)
```

OpenID Connect defines three logout mechanisms to address the different architectures:
- [OpenID Connect Session Management 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-session-1_0.html)
- [OpenID Connect Front-Channel Logout 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-frontchannel-1_0.html)
- [OpenID Connect Back-Channel Logout 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-backchannel-1_0.html)

#### Session Management

> Session Management in OpenID Connect defines a mechanism for a client (Relying Party, RP) to monitor the login status of the user in the provider (OP, e.g ZITADEL).
> When a user logs out of the provider, the user's session is terminated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Session Management in OpenID Connect defines a mechanism for a client (Relying Party, RP) to monitor the state of the user session from a identity provider (OP, e.g ZITADEL).
When a user logs out of the provider, the user's session is terminated and the client can in turn reflect that in its behavior.
```

#### RP initiated Logout

> All logout mechanisms are triggered by a request from the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the RP initiated flow all logout processes are triggered by a request from the client (e.g your application) through a well defined standard API by redirecting the user-agent to the [end_session_endpoint](/docs/apis/openidoauth/endpoints#end_session_endpoint).
```

Reviewer: Should we not also add a curl example here?

```
GET {your_domain}/oidc/v1/end_session
    ?id_token_hint=id_token
    &post_logout_redirect_uri=https://rp.example.com/logged_out
    &state=random_string
 ```

#### Front-Channel Logout

The user agent handles the front-channel logout. 
Each client with an OpenID Session of the user that supports front-channel renders an iframe so the logout request is performed on all clients parallel.

:::note
This is not yet implemented in ZITADEL
:::

#### Back-Channel Logout

The back-channel logout is a mechanism on the server-side and the user agent does not have to do anything.
The user will logout from all clients even in the case the user agent was closed.

:::note
This is not yet implemented in ZITADEL
:::

> ## Use Cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scenarios
```

We could call it scenarios. I think that works better

> 1. Logout all users from current user-agent/browser (current implementation of ZITADEL end_session_endpoint)
> 2. Logout my user from current user-agent/browser
> 3. Logout my user from all devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Logout all users from the current user-agent/browser (current implementation of ZITADEL end_session_endpoint)
2. Logout my user from the current user-agent/browser
3. Logout my user from the all devices
```

## Logout in ZITADEL

ZITADEL generates a user-agent cookie as soon as a user authenticates the first time. 

> All open sessions on that user-agent (browser) will be stored to the same cookie.

Reviewer 2: Could you describe what that implies? Not sure what I should learn from this info.

Initiating a request to the [end_session_endpoint](../../apis/openidoauth/endpoints#end_session_endpoint) will terminate all open sessions on the given user agent.
If you have specified some post_logout_redirect_uris on your client you have to send either the id_token_hint or the client_id as param in your request.
So ZITADEL is able to read the configured redirect uris.

A logout request will look similar to the following:
```
GET https://{your-domain}/oidc/v1/end_session_endpoint
    ?id_token_hint={id_token_issued_to_client}
```

> 

Reviewer: Is this not the RP initiated logout behaviour?

Maybe we can integrate this uptop and only do an explainer section how ZITADEL tracks the session with the help of the cookie.
